[Amit Varma]: I remember a time when journalism was different.
[Amit Varma]: It was a battle to find the truth, not a fight over what is the truth.
[Amit Varma]: It was the first draft of history, not a first draft of competing fictions.
[Amit Varma]: It was cold, rational reporting, not heated partisan polemic.
[Amit Varma]: Indian journalism has always been mediocre.
[Amit Varma]: But there was a time when the intent, at least, was to get at the facts, not to push specific
[Amit Varma]: narratives.
[Amit Varma]: From facts to narratives, from asking measured questions, to shouting, shouting, shouting.
[Amit Varma]: From being a corrective to politics, to becoming a tool of politics.
[Amit Varma]: How did we get here?
[Amit Varma]: What happened?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a 70s kid, like my guest on today's show, Nidhi Rajdhan.
[Amit Varma]: When we grew up in the 80s and 90s, there was a broad consensus on what the facts were.
[Amit Varma]: And while everyone distrusted politics, we more or less trusted the media.
[Amit Varma]: It might often have been inept, mostly mediocre, but it was well intentioned.
[Amit Varma]: All that has now changed.
[Amit Varma]: Our media is a mess, especially news television, but not only news television.
[Amit Varma]: I have watched this as an alarmed observer on the sidelines, writing columns and pontificating
[Amit Varma]: from a distance, but never really in the thick of the battlefield.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi has been in the middle of the action though, helping us to figure out a changing
[Amit Varma]: India since she first joined NDTV in 1999.
[Amit Varma]: NDTV, the training ground for so many prominent journalists, once looked like it would set
[Amit Varma]: the benchmark for good reporting.
[Amit Varma]: Now it looks like an outlier in these shrill, polarized times.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, for these 21 years, has embodied that cliche about how journalists must comfort
[Amit Varma]: the afflicted and afflict the comfortable, but the comfortable are not comfortable with
[Amit Varma]: being afflicted and independent journalism in India is being attacked in so many different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi is now headed to Harvard to teach journalism there, and I managed to catch her in the transition
[Amit Varma]: to share her insights on the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: In the last few months, I have spent hundreds, if not thousands of hours watching TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: You might consider it an addiction and indeed TikTok always gets my dopamine going.
[Amit Varma]: I don't call this addiction though, I call it sociological research or even taking one
[Amit Varma]: for the team.
[Amit Varma]: I have designed a new course called TikTok and Indian society, and I invite you to be
[Amit Varma]: part of it.
[Amit Varma]: I believe that TikTok reflects real India better than any other outlet for news and
[Amit Varma]: entertainment.
[Amit Varma]: Our mainstream sources of news and entertainment are controlled by elites who just don't get
[Amit Varma]: small town India or village India or poor India or even young aspirational India.
[Amit Varma]: This TikTok has blown away these barriers and given the means of production to everyone.
[Amit Varma]: It has empowered people who otherwise did not have a voice or a platform.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm blown away by the talent I see every day on this app.
[Amit Varma]: And my eyes are also opened to so many shades and nuances of India that I had not noticed
[Amit Varma]: before.
[Amit Varma]: We see the worst of India in our prejudices and attitudes, but also the best in our creativity
[Amit Varma]: and our descent.
[Amit Varma]: My course is unique as it will be conducted surprise, surprise on WhatsApp and will involve
[Amit Varma]: both my thoughts on the many teams I discuss as well as hundreds of amazing videos that
[Amit Varma]: illustrate my points.
[Amit Varma]: I am charging rupees 5,000 for this course to head on over to cnunseen.in slash TikTok
[Amit Varma]: to enroll for TikTok and Indian society.
[Amit Varma]: My new course over at cnunseen.in slash TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, before we get to sort of talking about journalism and your career in journalism,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a bit about sort of your life before that, like your dad, of course, was Maharaj
[Amit Varma]: Krishan Rajzan, who used to be editor-in-chief of PTI, noted journalist.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you grew up across the world in London and in New York, and I read somewhere
[Amit Varma]: that you wanted to be a doctor when you were a kid, not a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, tell me a bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: What were your sort of formative influences like and why did you decide to turn to journalism?
[Guest]: So yeah, that doctor thing is funny because, well, first, like all children, I wanted to
[Guest]: be an astronaut.
[Guest]: And that pretty much died by the time I turned 12, because I realized I didn't like flying
[Guest]: very much.
[Guest]: So outer space was really out of my league.
[Guest]: And then, yeah, I kind of got interested in medicine, and I took up science.
[Guest]: We'd moved back to India, and I took up science as my stream of study in classes 11 and 12.
[Guest]: And I remember my dad coming to me and saying, why do you want to spend so many years of
[Guest]: your life studying, do something creative?
[Guest]: And you know, my mother was shocked.
[Guest]: She's like, how can you tell your daughter, who wants to take up this noble profession,
[Guest]: like a good Kashmiri girl, you know, she wants to be a doctor.
[Guest]: And you know, he said it because, you know, when he was in school and college, he never
[Guest]: wanted to be a doctor or an engineer, which was the only thing that Kashmiri parents wanted
[Guest]: their kids to do.
[Guest]: And I think he was very keen that I do something creative.
[Guest]: And then around that time, when I actually joined college, which was LSR, television
[Guest]: started to become big, you know, NDTV was, I mean, there was The World This Week and
[Guest]: NDTV had come on to Star News.
[Guest]: And so TV was becoming more and more interesting.
[Guest]: And my mother said that, would you ever be interested in this?
[Guest]: And I realized that actually I would, because I guess without realizing it, we grew up in
[Guest]: a household where news was just part of life, like brushing your teeth.
[Guest]: You know, you get up in the morning, read the newspaper, you have to watch the evening
[Guest]: news at night.
[Guest]: And so I always enjoyed keeping up with current affairs.
[Guest]: But I didn't want to follow my dad's footsteps and become a print journalist, because I thought
[Guest]: there would be too many comparisons.
[Guest]: So I was reluctant at first, but when I realized that there was another medium by which to
[Guest]: do journalism, which would be something I could claim as my own.
[Guest]: That is why, you know, broadcasting happened.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how it happened.
[Amit Varma]: And what was sort of your formative influences there?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I mean, this in two senses, one, of course, is in the narrow sense of, after you
[Amit Varma]: want to be a journalist, who are you looking at as role models?
[Amit Varma]: And where are you sort of imbibing those values from?
[Amit Varma]: But also in a broader sense, you know, intellectually, what were your influences?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what were the books you remember from that time, which maybe shaped the way
[Amit Varma]: you thought about the world and so on?
[Guest]: Well, I think, obviously, my dad was a big influence in terms of just journalistic ideals
[Guest]: and values.
[Guest]: And he's always been someone who's really been an ideal journalist in that way.
[Guest]: And someone I've really looked up to.
[Guest]: But I remember as a kid growing up in the US, reading about Watergate, and, you know,
[Guest]: looking at journalists, broadcasters like Sam Donaldson, you know, there was that famous
[Guest]: you know, hold on, Mr. President, he even wrote a book by that title.
[Guest]: And, you know, that that really stuck with me as a kid that, you know, a reporter can,
[Guest]: you know, stop the leader of the free world and say, you know, hold on, you have to answer
[Guest]: my question, you know, and and that's how powerful journalism is, and how it should
[Guest]: be.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, nobody does that here.
[Guest]: And nobody would.
[Guest]: But these were some of the things that really influenced me growing up watching broadcasters
[Guest]: like Sam Donaldson, like Tom Brokaw, and seeing the kind of journalism that they did.
[Guest]: And it's so different to what we see on TV on Indian TV today, certainly.
[Guest]: And of course, seeing it in my own home.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of a difference did it make, you know, relative to your colleagues, for
[Amit Varma]: example, the fact that, you know, you spend time in London and New York growing up, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your father, of course, was a journalist, and you were exposed to perhaps much more
[Amit Varma]: than many of your colleagues might have been like, you know, I remember when I was like,
[Amit Varma]: I'm also a 70s kid like you, and when I was growing up in the 80s, in the 90s, print journalism
[Amit Varma]: was considered sort of a last resort, you fail to do your medical and your engineering
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And print journalism was in the last resort.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, at all my time in journalism, I've sort of bemoaned the poor editorial standards
[Amit Varma]: and writing standards and all of that TV was different, because TV was new, it appeared
[Amit Varma]: like there was a brash new generation coming up.
[Amit Varma]: And within that, you were someone who had, you know, perhaps a little more, a slightly
[Amit Varma]: different experience, while growing up in terms of exposure to media and culture and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: Did that make much of a difference per se?
[Amit Varma]: And within television?
[Amit Varma]: Did you feel that, you know, you were a lot apart from the older school, the print journalists?
[Guest]: You know, the thing is that I think the kind of childhood I had was very privileged, and
[Guest]: I was really lucky that I had it.
[Guest]: For both me and my brother, it was, as you rightly said, it just exposes you to a completely
[Guest]: different world.
[Guest]: I was four plus when we moved to England.
[Guest]: And so I did my initial sort of nursery schooling here.
[Guest]: And, you know, my whole worldview of things, I think for all of us, our early childhood
[Guest]: and those formative years are really important in terms of how we, our values are shaped,
[Guest]: how we look at the world, and perhaps the most important.
[Guest]: So especially in the US, because by the time I was in New York, you know, I was in a class
[Guest]: of people where everybody was, everyone was basically an immigrant.
[Guest]: You know, I grew up in a vibrant city where, you know, my best friend was an African American,
[Guest]: another close friend of mine, who's still my closest friend today, half Bangladeshi,
[Guest]: half German, very sort of eclectic, you know, childhood in that sense, in terms of the people
[Guest]: you interacted with, grew up with.
[Guest]: So I've had a very liberal outlook towards life, towards everything as a result of that.
[Guest]: So that really shaped me.
[Guest]: And schooling there was very, very different.
[Guest]: And coming back to India was actually very hard, Amit, because, you know, the school
[Guest]: system here was different, the emphasis on rote learning, etc, that wasn't something
[Guest]: that I was used to, though I did pretty well as a student here also.
[Guest]: Also the language because, you know, I'm a Kashmiri.
[Guest]: So in my house, we grew up speaking Kashmiri always, and we grew up speaking English, obviously.
[Guest]: But Hindi is not our mother tongue in that sense.
[Guest]: So Hindi for me was, you know, Amitabh Bachchan films and, you know, stuff like his dialogues
[Guest]: in Hindi movies, which I really enjoyed, but I wasn't fluent at all in Hindi.
[Guest]: And so when I came back, I was 13.
[Guest]: And it was really hard, but, you know, getting rid of my American accent so that I could
[Guest]: fit in with people to fit in with my classmates, because you really feel like an outsider.
[Guest]: I didn't know what Antakshari was, because that was like, those were the nice days, you
[Guest]: know, when kids actually played Antakshari and stuff like that, when they were like 14.
[Guest]: So you know, like, I didn't know all those Hindi songs, I watched Hindi movies, but because
[Guest]: I wasn't comfortable with the language, but I'm proud of the fact that when I did decide
[Guest]: to take that plunge into TV and all of that, you know, when I was in college, and I would
[Guest]: read the Navbharat Times every Sunday, out loud, with a Hindi English dictionary next
[Guest]: to me, because I knew that if I have to be a broadcaster, if I have to be a journalist
[Guest]: period in this country, I have to know Hindi.
[Guest]: And I have to know it well enough to be able to communicate on air.
[Guest]: And I did it.
[Guest]: And I anchored, I have been a bilingual anchoring reporter all these years, I anchored on our
[Guest]: Hindi channel for many years, I've anchored the US elections with Pankaj Pachauri in Hindi,
[Guest]: with Vikram Chandra in Hindi, I've anchored the budget in Hindi.
[Guest]: And I'm really, really proud that I was able to do that.
[Guest]: Because this it wasn't easy.
[Guest]: It wasn't the language that sort of came naturally.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they often say of cricketers when they play a beautiful shot that oh, he
[Amit Varma]: makes it look so easy.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one can have the sort of the same impression about news anchors not realizing
[Amit Varma]: that sort of hard work that goes in behind the scenes.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking aloud, I was you know, when you mentioned how your cosmopolitan background
[Amit Varma]: and you know, being in a school in New York that had, I mean, which is basically a city
[Amit Varma]: of immigrants shaped your outlook to the world.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud, I'm therefore wondering that, how true would you say from all your
[Amit Varma]: experiences of meeting people throughout the last 20 something years, which is such a core
[Amit Varma]: part of your job?
[Amit Varma]: How true is it?
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that people are often shaped by their circumstances that their ideology
[Amit Varma]: can come out of what they have been exposed to and are there for example, the other thought
[Amit Varma]: that sort of strikes me is that despite the Kashmiri Pandit background, you don't sort
[Amit Varma]: of have the resentments that many Kashmiri Pandits do for, you know, understandable reasons
[Amit Varma]: in their case.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, I agree with that.
[Guest]: I do think the circumstances we are exposed to shape who we are.
[Guest]: And for instance, on the Kashmiri Pandit question, I'll tell you something.
[Guest]: I mean, I think it's because you know, it's not that my family wasn't affected by it.
[Guest]: It was my grandparents had to leave with their bags packed overnight and flee.
[Guest]: And my father and my mother would always tell my brother and me that look, we shouldn't
[Guest]: blame entire communities for what happened.
[Guest]: My father still has a very romantic notion of how he grew up in Kashmir.
[Guest]: And he truly believes, I know a lot of Kashmiri Pandits don't and they get angry when some
[Guest]: of us say this, but he truly believes in that idea of Kashmiriyat, that his best friends
[Guest]: growing up were Muslims.
[Guest]: And whenever we would visit Kashmir every year, we would always go to Khil Bhawani,
[Guest]: which is our most revered temple there.
[Guest]: But on the way back, we would also go to Hazrat Bal Mosque, to the shrine, and offer prayers
[Guest]: there as well.
[Guest]: And my parents would always say, my dad in particular, that, you know, this is who we
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: This is how we must respect all religions.
[Guest]: And that yes, a lot of things happened during the Pandit exodus, which have made people
[Guest]: angry and bitter for understandable reasons.
[Guest]: But that the Muslim community has also suffered, that we cannot tarnish entire community, etc.
[Guest]: So I've grown up with those values.
[Guest]: And I guess I don't blame those from my community who have actually borne the brunt of that
[Guest]: exodus and the kind of atrocities that happened with them and their families.
[Guest]: Obviously, you know, they are shaped by that anger.
[Guest]: They are shaped by that very deep and real pain that they went through.
[Guest]: So I don't think that I can sit in judgment on, you know, how they feel.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I'm proud of the fact that I do meet many of those, they may not
[Guest]: be vocal on Twitter, like some others, but I do meet many Kashmiri Pandits also, who
[Guest]: despite having gone through what they have, are, you know, sort of willing to, to heal
[Guest]: and heal together.
[Guest]: And I would hope that that sentiment would eventually prevail.
[Amit Varma]: I was going to ask a question about this towards the end of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But as we brought up Kashmir, I'll ask it now, I just want to quote from the introduction
[Amit Varma]: you wrote for your book, Left, Right or Center, where you spoke about how when you went to
[Amit Varma]: Srinagar to shoot your documentary there, and you've written quote, when I reached Srinagar,
[Amit Varma]: many people already recognized me from television, they knew I was a Kashmiri Pandit.
[Amit Varma]: At first I was wary, my mother's fears ringing in my head, but very soon that fear dissipated.
[Amit Varma]: I was welcomed warmly like a long lost daughter who had finally come home.
[Amit Varma]: And with that, my faith in the idea of Kashmiriyat and the idea of India was restored just a
[Amit Varma]: little.
[Amit Varma]: And I quote, and elsewhere in the introduction, you talk about how Gurmehar Kaur, who lost
[Amit Varma]: her father in combat at Kargil in 99, once when she was chatting with her mom about it,
[Amit Varma]: her mom said that, listen, Pakistan didn't kill him, war did.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's also the story about Yogendra Yadav, who after what his family
[Amit Varma]: had suffered during partition was named Salim, you know, that was his middle name, which
[Amit Varma]: is again, such a beautiful sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me and you know, I've also traveled through Pakistan covering cricket
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, despite all the harsh, shrill, angry rhetoric that
[Amit Varma]: is there in the airwaves and so on, when you actually go down to the level of the common
[Amit Varma]: person, these tribal distinctions don't seem to matter so much.
[Amit Varma]: There's another strand that kind of plays out.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think it is then that when it comes to the media, or it's the ugliness that gets
[Amit Varma]: accentuated and exacerbated?
[Guest]: I think that's just the nature of the medium, Amit.
[Guest]: And the fact is that social media in particular is a medium in which ugliness gets amplified
[Guest]: to infinity, you know, and it brings out I think the worst in people.
[Guest]: It also brings out a lot of good in people.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that, but, you know, honestly, I remember, I mean, I'm in that generation
[Guest]: like you, you know, we had life without social media, and it was so much simpler when you
[Guest]: look back, so much nicer, and now look how complicated and, you know, mentally exhausting
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: And I just think that that's, that just brings out the worst in all of us.
[Guest]: And I agree with you.
[Guest]: I mean, like, when you actually talk to people on the ground, the sentiments will be very
[Guest]: different from what the establishment, you know, will actually do.
[Guest]: Pakistan is a prime example of that.
[Guest]: I have friends who are Pakistanis, very good people, and who are brave enough to take on
[Guest]: the ISI and their own army very publicly journalists in particular, in fact, I think their media
[Guest]: is far more free, frankly, and brave than ours.
[Guest]: And that's another story.
[Guest]: But, you know, even in Kashmir, my own experiences have been like that.
[Guest]: But, you know, I mean, social media tends to reduce everything to these dangerous binaries,
[Guest]: which in itself is another conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come to that a little later.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go to your early days in television in the 90s, which is, of course, before social
[Amit Varma]: media and you know, sort of as a viewer watching the evolution of television, I remember it
[Amit Varma]: from the early days when Pranav Roy did The World This Week, which was, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: one hour weekly thing we all used to look forward to on the only channel we had.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, I remember the video news magazine, News Track used to come out and
[Amit Varma]: there was such a leisurely pace to everything.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also spoken about how when you first joined news television, people had so
[Amit Varma]: much more time to do their stories, you had a couple of days, or, you know, longer to
[Amit Varma]: put a single story together.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a bit about what those early days were like, like, you know, you obviously
[Amit Varma]: joined NDTV as a bright eyed 21 year old, what did you expect?
[Amit Varma]: What did you find was different?
[Amit Varma]: What did you learn in those early years before things started changing in the 2000s?
[Guest]: You know, it was so different.
[Guest]: I joined in 1999.
[Guest]: And those were like the golden days of television.
[Guest]: And I've seen, I've seen the whole transition from that into what has happened now, which
[Guest]: is both sad and, you know, strange.
[Guest]: But the early days were incredible, because there was a lot of idealism, there was not
[Guest]: that kind of cutthroat competition from other news channels.
[Guest]: And honestly, NDTV was and in my view, continues to be the best television news organization.
[Guest]: I mean, there is no I mean, it's not a coincidence that all the major sort of players on the
[Guest]: television news broadcasting stage in India today have their origins in NDTV, some good
[Guest]: and some not so good, and you know who I mean.
[Guest]: But you know, the basic training, they all came from the NDTV stable by and large, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So it was incredible, because this was an organization at that time that was, you know,
[Guest]: we had money, we had resources, we had the platform, you know, you could spend days traveling
[Guest]: for a story.
[Guest]: Like I said earlier, as you pointed out, you would spend time on that story.
[Guest]: There was a whole series we used to do for many years actually called India matters,
[Guest]: where all of us would take turns every month for one week in a month, we'd be assigned
[Guest]: to India matters where we traveled into rural India and sort of uncovering India invisible,
[Guest]: going beyond the regular politics, the day to day stuff that happened in Delhi.
[Guest]: And you know, you had the budgets for that, you know, I remember when I joined, I spent
[Guest]: just two, three weeks in orientation, which was great.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, you you're actually being taught now there is no time for this orientation
[Guest]: are new reporters who come, come, they train for a few days and bam, you know, you're out
[Guest]: in the field because there's no time.
[Guest]: But those were different days, you know, you you were leisurely taught about how editing
[Guest]: is done, camera work is done, etc.
[Guest]: And you know, I walked into Pranoy's room one day, and I said, Can I go to Tibet?
[Guest]: I want to do a documentary there and Pranoy was like, Yeah, of course, you should apply
[Guest]: for a visa.
[Guest]: I did.
[Guest]: And I got a visa like a year later and I went.
[Guest]: So you know, I can't do that now, nobody can because there ain't no money for that kind
[Guest]: of stuff now.
[Guest]: But you know, I one day I went in, you know, I said, I'd like to go to Iran.
[Guest]: And if I get an interview with the foreign minister, can I stay back for a week and do
[Guest]: a documentary?
[Guest]: Of course you can.
[Guest]: I went, I did that.
[Guest]: And, you know, shot there for like seven, eight days.
[Guest]: That was an adventure, you know, came back, put it on air.
[Guest]: So I think, I mean, those were really the golden days, like I said, and that's, of course,
[Guest]: linked to the financial health of an organization, among other things.
[Guest]: And over time, you know, things for the media as a whole have become much more difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And we know, we know that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll discuss sort of the transitional points.
[Amit Varma]: But I have a newbie question, which is that even then, you know, NDTV was, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a 24 hour channel.
[Amit Varma]: So what gave you guys, you know, the luxury to sort of take so much time and do so much
[Amit Varma]: thoughtful work and do the sort of stuff that you did with, you know, Uncovering India and
[Amit Varma]: so on?
[Amit Varma]: Did you have more people?
[Amit Varma]: Was it just more budgets?
[Amit Varma]: Was the news structured differently?
[Guest]: What was so different?
[Guest]: It was structured differently also, Amit, because you didn't have bulletins, like every
[Guest]: hour, you know, you had them, I remember, alternate hours, and then the flagship bulletin
[Guest]: was your nine o'clock, you had more people, you had more budgets, so you could actually
[Guest]: spare a bunch of reporters to be doing something completely different, somebody on an investigation
[Guest]: for Star News Sunday, which was like, you know, your long format magazine show on Sundays,
[Guest]: you had people you could spare for India Matters, which was a completely different team altogether.
[Guest]: So it's all those things together, which which made it possible to and because you didn't
[Guest]: have that sort of some other channel breathing down your neck.
[Guest]: And those kind of rivalries you could actually I mean, I spent three days doing a rainwater
[Guest]: harvesting story, for God's sake, I was damn proud of, you know, but that was a new thing
[Guest]: then, you know, and I was like, you know, I showcased what rainwater harvesting was about.
[Guest]: I think one of my I think the first story I did a P2C for, if I'm not mistaken, was
[Guest]: about condom vending machines in government offices, which is super awkward to shoot.
[Guest]: But I had to interview, but I spent two days on that I didn't have to like, I didn't have
[Guest]: to rush into it and do it in two hours, you know.
[Guest]: So I mean, like nowadays, there's no question, even I would tell a reporter, what do you
[Guest]: need some bites and, you know, some shots and none of that then, you know, there was
[Amit Varma]: a very nice feature on Jon Stewart in the New York Times.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from something he said with Struck A Chord, where he said, quote, 24 hour
[Amit Varma]: news networks are built for one thing.
[Amit Varma]: And that's 9-11.
[Amit Varma]: There are very few events that would justify being covered 24 hours a day, seven days a
[Amit Varma]: week.
[Amit Varma]: So in the absence of urgency, they have to create it, you create urgency through conflict,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as this sort of process started playing out, how did it affect you?
[Amit Varma]: Was it sort of frustrating, because then the pressure on the channel becomes to amplify
[Amit Varma]: every damn little thing that you cover, which means that, you know, one, everything is shallow,
[Amit Varma]: because you're spending less time on it.
[Amit Varma]: And two, you can't go deep into, you know, areas which may not be of interest to mass
[Amit Varma]: viewers like rainwater harvesting, I presume, how was that process like in coming to terms
[Guest]: with it?
[Guest]: I completely agree with what Jon Stewart has said there.
[Guest]: And that is part of the problem that, well, the two things in India, frankly, unfortunately,
[Guest]: for whatever reason, you don't even have to manufacture urgent news, because there's always
[Guest]: something happening.
[Guest]: But the fact is, on a serious note, that even the most sort of anodyne news items, which
[Guest]: can just pass off as a graphic or be put on the ticker, increasingly, I found in the last
[Guest]: few years, in particular, there is a thing about mini, but we need an OB on this right
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: It's not that big a story, but because the other channel is doing it, we need to like
[Guest]: stay with this for like 10 minutes and play it up and, you know, get reactions from x,
[Guest]: y, z.
[Guest]: And sometimes you don't even get a chance to process, you know, what it is that you
[Guest]: are doing an OB on, you know, like, one day, I was suddenly asked to
[Guest]: anchor on an RBI press conference.
[Guest]: And I actually I said, No, because I said, I am not an expert on the RBI.
[Guest]: And let's not pretend that anchors know everything.
[Guest]: My expertise is in politics and foreign policy, you want me to, you know, come on and do something
[Guest]: on that, I'd be happy to, because that's what I've done my entire life, but I'm not suddenly
[Guest]: going to be an expert on the repo rate, which, frankly, I need to read about and understand,
[Guest]: I'm not going to pretend I know anything about it.
[Guest]: So we're in that age, Amit, right now, where everything is like, is big, you know, and
[Guest]: for me, personally, that is part of the reason why I became extremely tired of it.
[Guest]: You know, in the last few years, while I love television, and I've actually walked away
[Guest]: from television, from the best primetime slot that one could have, I mean, you know, some
[Guest]: people say that, I mean, what else do you want?
[Guest]: Great executive editor, nine o'clock slot, it's not that it's just that the nature of
[Guest]: the medium now just doesn't let you breathe anymore.
[Guest]: You know, and you're just, it's just constant, there is, I mean, your brain just doesn't
[Guest]: stop working.
[Guest]: It's exhausting.
[Guest]: It really is.
[Guest]: And television has just become like, this competitive thing to put your senior anchors
[Guest]: on air for everything.
[Guest]: Every small thing is now a big thing.
[Guest]: So I think that's, you know, something we all need to reflect on.
[Guest]: But that's the way it is now, with so many news channels out there.
[Amit Varma]: And I once did an episode with Ashok Malik, where he gave me an interesting insight onto
[Amit Varma]: this race to the bottom, where he said that, you know, when you have channels paying such
[Amit Varma]: enormous license fees to just get into the business, you know, the pressure to recoup
[Amit Varma]: is immense.
[Amit Varma]: So they have no choice but to sort of chase TRPs in this sort of frenetic race, and then
[Amit Varma]: everybody gets caught up in that and there's no getting out.
[Amit Varma]: You know, do you think structural reasons are like that are part of the problem that
[Amit Varma]: because entry barriers are so high, once you get in, you cannot really chase a niche and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do whatever you, you know, do rainwater harvesting showreels, for example?
[Guest]: Well, why not?
[Guest]: I mean, it did work for us.
[Guest]: It's not that I mean, NDTV is India's most trusted news brand repeatedly for a reason.
[Guest]: So I think it's not that it didn't work.
[Guest]: And look, these bark TRPs, frankly, are TRPs that NDTV has challenged all the time, they
[Guest]: don't make any sense.
[Guest]: If you if you look at how our shows do on YouTube, for instance, or even Tata Sky, the
[Guest]: numbers are completely different from what bark puts out.
[Guest]: So there's so much I mean, NDTV has gone public with this about the kind of manipulation that
[Guest]: happens, you know, with ratings.
[Guest]: So I do think that at least there used to be a space for this.
[Guest]: And I'd like to believe that there is, you know, still space for it, although sometimes
[Guest]: one gets so disheartened that even during something like this coronavirus pandemic,
[Guest]: when TV viewership has jumped immensely across the board, because people were in lockdown,
[Guest]: they were at home, people wanted information.
[Guest]: If your bark ratings are still reflecting that Republican times now are your leading
[Guest]: news channels, then I begin to wonder the choices that people are making, you know,
[Guest]: and is this what they wanted to see?
[Guest]: Because those channels were not giving you information, they were still doing Tablighi
[Guest]: Jamaat 24 hours a day.
[Guest]: And is that what people want to see?
[Guest]: So I said, you know, a lot of these numbers don't make sense to me just because of how
[Guest]: they just don't add up.
[Guest]: You know, they actually don't add up if you just look at online and how we're doing online
[Guest]: and how we're doing on bar.
[Guest]: So I don't know, I still think there is space for this kind of good journalism.
[Guest]: And that's why NDTV will not become tabloid, it is not going to be tabloid.
[Guest]: It's not been easy for us.
[Guest]: But NDTV would never take the sort of times now route, we're just genetically completely
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: One of the shifts I've noticed over the past two decades, exacerbated by social media,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, it began even before that was that, you know, when we were growing up in
[Amit Varma]: the 80s and 90s, there was a broad consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: There wasn't a dispute about what is actually happening.
[Amit Varma]: You know, your different media outlets may chase different angles or have different opinions
[Amit Varma]: and something.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, everyone kind of agreed on what the facts were.
[Amit Varma]: What has now happened is one that people get their information from many more sources,
[Amit Varma]: media itself is so fragmented.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there is no longer that consensus on the truth, people have their ideologies
[Amit Varma]: or their visions of the world and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And they just want information that sort of confirms that and we all get sucked into these
[Amit Varma]: echo chambers, which gets shriller and shriller as you know, you compete to sort of express
[Amit Varma]: your own virtue within your selected echo chamber.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, then you begin to wonder what is this news thing?
[Amit Varma]: Is it just a battle of competing narratives that do facts even matter anymore?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, barring, you know, small islands of excellence like NDTV and a handful of online
[Amit Varma]: independent sites, not the mainstream media.
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me that everything else is about, you know, this big battle of narratives.
[Amit Varma]: How does that sort of make you feel?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I understand that NDTV has had its core values and stuck to them throughout.
[Amit Varma]: But more and more in these times, it seems like an outlier.
[Guest]: It is an outlier.
[Guest]: And I completely agree with you because now it's become like the media has become ideologically
[Guest]: divided in this country, the way pretty much everything else has.
[Guest]: And that's to me has taken, I mean, what I see, frankly, is a decay of an important institution
[Guest]: in a democracy, which is a free press.
[Guest]: And I see that not just in isolation, Amit, I see it as a larger decay of democratic institutions
[Guest]: in the country as a whole, whether it is parliament.
[Guest]: I mean, how much work our parliament committee is doing, for example, how much look at the
[Guest]: way bills are rammed through parliament without any proper debate and discussion, you know,
[Guest]: even the finance bill.
[Guest]: So you may have a big majority in parliament and you may have an overwhelming majority,
[Guest]: but democracy is not about just the majority.
[Guest]: It's about taking everyone along.
[Guest]: So look at the way parliament has been diminished.
[Guest]: Look at the way the judiciary has abdicated its responsibility with the honorable exceptions,
[Guest]: I may say, of some high courts, which, to my surprise, in the last few months have woken
[Guest]: up, for instance, to the migrant crisis in a way that, you know, should really sort of
[Guest]: wake up the Supreme Court of India, which waded into it much later.
[Guest]: But if you look at the Supreme Court of India, which has sort of turned the other way on
[Guest]: human rights issues, constitutional issues, on habeas corpus, it's changed the meaning
[Guest]: of that, particularly when it comes to Kashmir.
[Guest]: So when you see what is happening to us as a democracy right now, I feel that the decay
[Guest]: of the media and the decline of the media as an institution in India has to be seen
[Guest]: in that context.
[Guest]: I think in India, a big crisis also stares at us because of the way, I mean, you raised
[Guest]: this question earlier about, you know, the structures and being dependent on, you know,
[Guest]: certain parameters to, for instance, make money and TRPs.
[Guest]: That's part of the problem, that your media is actually dependent on the government for
[Guest]: advertisements to survive.
[Guest]: And that whole model and that whole system is utterly flawed.
[Guest]: We have a media that does not, you know, stand together and is not institutionally strong
[Guest]: enough to fight back from government pressure or government intimidation.
[Guest]: I mean, you'll have the odd statement from an editor's guild, but please tell me, what
[Guest]: is the Press Council of India?
[Guest]: What is its role?
[Guest]: When has it ever done anything meaningful?
[Guest]: Does anybody listen to the Press Council of India?
[Guest]: You know, so that to me is the saddest thing, actually, just seeing the sort of decay.
[Guest]: I mean, you look at America, you see that in America also mainstream media is constantly
[Guest]: under attack.
[Guest]: The president hates them.
[Guest]: He abuses them, but he cannot ignore them.
[Guest]: He still gives interviews.
[Guest]: He still does press conferences.
[Guest]: He still went to the New York Times editorial board and did an interview with them, despite,
[Guest]: you know, all the names he calls the New York Times, right?
[Guest]: So institutionally, the media there is much stronger.
[Guest]: And you know, so they can call their president a liar and not worry about repercussions.
[Guest]: And here, we are the complete opposite.
[Guest]: You know, we have become ideologically divided.
[Guest]: The truth is a casualty.
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: But some of these news channels, to me, are not news channels.
[Guest]: I don't know what to categorize them as.
[Guest]: They are, I mean, I used to laugh at them, Amit, at one point of time.
[Guest]: I used to think it was funny that you had these 10 windows and you had the anchor screaming
[Guest]: like a banshee about something.
[Guest]: But I don't think it's funny anymore.
[Guest]: And I realized in the last couple of years in particular, that what they're doing is
[Guest]: they're putting targets on people's backs.
[Guest]: You know, they're demonizing entire communities.
[Guest]: They demonize Kashmiris all the time.
[Guest]: They like, they want to paint all Kashmiri Muslims as pro-Pakistani terrorists, which
[Guest]: Kashmiris are not.
[Guest]: They will question the credentials.
[Guest]: They have equated anyone who criticizes the government as that, as being anti-national
[Guest]: or unpatriotic.
[Guest]: You know, the government is not the nation, right?
[Guest]: So they whip up that hysteria, they whip up and they're doing it now.
[Guest]: I mean, even with China, it's embarrassing when you look at the screen grabs of, you
[Guest]: know, last 10 days ago that they said stuff like Nepal kneels and China bows.
[Guest]: And do you know how badly those kind of headlines and captions play out in those countries?
[Guest]: People are very, very sensitive to that.
[Guest]: You know, Nepalese friends have called and said how angry and sort of hurt they are seeing
[Guest]: those kind of captions.
[Guest]: Look what Nepal did to you.
[Guest]: You know, and China bows and you know, stuff like that.
[Guest]: I mean, I think they're doing far, far more harm than we realize to our social fabric,
[Guest]: not just to journalism, but to society.
[Guest]: And I think it's really, it's just dangerous now.
[Guest]: It's not funny anymore.
[Amit Varma]: You know, since you mentioned Nepal, this anecdote came to mind about this pitched battle
[Amit Varma]: that took place, I think, in the late 30s or 1940s, when people were discussing what
[Amit Varma]: shape an independent India could take, which was then in the future, of course, and Mahatma
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi said something to the effect of the Nizam of Hyderabad could be the new ruler,
[Amit Varma]: at which Veer Savarkar took offense and said, no, we must be a Hindu kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: The king of Nepal should be the king of India.
[Amit Varma]: And contrast that with where we are, you know, I'm just thinking of the sort of contrast
[Amit Varma]: that you've seen, like in one of your interviews, you quoted your dad as telling you, quote,
[Amit Varma]: don't editorialize and get all your facts right, check with more than one source, get
[Amit Varma]: it right, do not get it first, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in contrast, when I was reading your introduction to left, right and center, I'll quote what
[Amit Varma]: you said, quote, it is now anti-national to even question the government.
[Amit Varma]: So most TV channels today simply don't do it.
[Amit Varma]: In an interview to NDTV, Arun Shourie called them North Korean TV channels that essentially
[Amit Varma]: parrot the government line.
[Amit Varma]: The raids on NDTV in June marked a turning point for free press in India.
[Amit Varma]: As Shourie said, it was meant to kill the chicken to frighten the monkeys, quoting a
[Amit Varma]: Chinese proverb, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And but just looking at how the media is structured in India, this seems so inevitable to me.
[Amit Varma]: For example, as you point out, the government has so many levers with which it can pressurize
[Amit Varma]: media.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense, just looking at the print media, you look at HD or TOI, they have so many other
[Amit Varma]: business interests, somebody will have a chemical factory somewhere, there can be an IT raid
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, so much of media runs basically on money coerced from us, you know, it runs
[Amit Varma]: on government advertisements, and the government uses that to basically buy the media and use
[Amit Varma]: it as a lever to pressurize the media.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you also, besides the carrot, you also see the stick, where you know, cases
[Amit Varma]: of sedition are filed on journalists, and there is a sort of a chilling effect in play
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, NDTV itself, of course, has taken a lot of pressure, there was a campaign to
[Amit Varma]: get advertisers to quit NDTV.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there have been income tax raids and all of that, you know, so just looking
[Amit Varma]: at this, I mean, do you think there's and the only sites that really survive are small
[Amit Varma]: online sites, which are not dependent on all of this, like, you know, the very brave people
[Amit Varma]: at alt news and the wire and scroll and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But beyond that, you know, do you think and but they are just below the radar mostly,
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of why, but, you know, it's that sort of one of the reasons that you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of glad to be getting I mean, are you glad to be just getting out of this?
[Amit Varma]: Are you thinking to yourself right now, not my circus, not my monkey, I've had enough
[Guest]: of this shit?
[Guest]: You know, partly?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: To be honest, I'm it.
[Guest]: But the thing is that I live and breathe news.
[Guest]: Okay, I love it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, it's the only thing I know how to do well, I've been a reporter, editor everything.
[Guest]: And so like, for me, this is a passion, which is why it makes me so angry to see what has
[Guest]: happened to the media in the last few years.
[Guest]: And, and, you know, it also just happened to be the right opportunity.
[Guest]: I mean, it's that, you know, this Harvard thing, you know, it came along.
[Guest]: And I thought to myself, I mean, I told them, I said that, Are you sure you're interested?
[Guest]: I mean, because I've never taught before.
[Guest]: And I'm not, I mean, it's very different to sort of talk to a roomful of people as a one
[Guest]: off and take questions.
[Guest]: But they were like, No, we're looking for people who don't come, you know, with that
[Guest]: baggage of teaching and would rather be able to teach through their own experiences and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: So I thought to myself that, you know, this is a great opportunity for me to actually
[Guest]: take a step back from the madness of this place, and to learn.
[Guest]: For me, this is an opportunity to be a student all over again, because I think I will be
[Guest]: the student, it's not that I will be, you know, the teacher, this gives me an opportunity
[Guest]: also to just learn to be in a very different atmosphere, where I learn from the students
[Guest]: I interact with.
[Guest]: And from the faculty there, I can go and sit in lectures.
[Guest]: And I'm not relocating Amit, by the way, it's a visiting role, I'll be back and forth between
[Guest]: Delhi and Boston.
[Guest]: So for me, it's the best of both worlds.
[Guest]: And maybe I'll, you know, start working on a book on the media or something, you know,
[Guest]: while, you know, while I spend time here in India.
[Guest]: But it's nice to be, you know, for 21 years, this is all I've done all the time, like,
[Guest]: it's 24 seven, it's been TV, earthquake ho gaya tum jao, plane crash ho gaya tum jao,
[Guest]: bombing ho gayi jao, you know, go to the spot.
[Guest]: And of course, in the last few years, it was every time something happened, go and anchor
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But you know, now it's nice to take a step back.
[Guest]: And it still connects me to journalism.
[Guest]: So it doesn't take me away from what I love.
[Guest]: But it hopefully will give me a different perspective.
[Guest]: And let me give something back to it, because I'm still very idealistic about it, for some
[Guest]: reason.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I don't get to speak to too many idealistic people.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm really glad you're getting a break after all these years, taking a grind and
[Amit Varma]: our listeners will also now get a break, but we'll be back because we have a lot to discuss.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics of
[Amit Varma]: producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: And that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: So, sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Nidhi Rahsaan and Nidhi, so far, we've sort of been talking about how
[Amit Varma]: television has changed, but over the, you know, the 21 years that you've been in it,
[Amit Varma]: but what has also changed is not just television itself, but the whole media landscape surrounding
[Amit Varma]: it and social media is a significant part of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you and I were just being nostalgic a little while back about how peaceful and
[Amit Varma]: nice the days were before social media.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about the kind of difference that, you know, social media has made to the
[Amit Varma]: way people cover news and to people like you personally, who cover the news.
[Guest]: Well, it's made a huge difference.
[Guest]: Look, the fact is that I think social media is great in that it's a great source of immediate
[Guest]: news.
[Guest]: As a journalist, when you follow, let's say, the AP Twitter handle, Reuters, or any news
[Guest]: organization's Twitter handle, you know, that you're getting immediate updates, you know,
[Guest]: and in the old days, you wouldn't get it so quickly, you would have to wait for the flash
[Guest]: to come up on the news wires on PTI or AP or Reuters, etc. on, you know, what, which
[Guest]: was connected to your office systems.
[Guest]: So social media has a certain immediacy to it, reporters directly tweet from a briefing
[Guest]: about what is happening, you know, word by word, what is being said, statements that
[Guest]: are coming in.
[Guest]: So it's very quick.
[Guest]: And that way, it's a great source of information.
[Guest]: But I mean, what it's also done is, I think, it's made news much more interactive, which
[Guest]: is both great and also a pain.
[Guest]: But on a serious note, I think it's good, it's good that a lot of your viewers can tell
[Guest]: you what they really think, let's say, of your show or of a particular story, they give
[Guest]: you feedback.
[Guest]: Very often, people flag important stories, like for instance, in this pandemic, people
[Guest]: have taken to Twitter to tell us about the way that, you know, hospitals had no beds,
[Guest]: you know, and if they hadn't done that, you know, it would have taken much longer to get
[Guest]: to know about how serious the crisis is, for example, in Delhi, you know, about the shortage
[Guest]: of beds.
[Guest]: So I think in that way, social media has played a great role.
[Guest]: And I mean, the abuse aside, I'm saying that when when there is a healthy conversation
[Guest]: between you and someone who reads your work, or watches your work, then that's great.
[Guest]: But yes, it's made reporting much more complicated, I'll tell you, for example, when I went to
[Guest]: cover Mr. Modi's visit to Israel a few years ago, I think it was three years ago, firstly,
[Guest]: you know, cost cutting.
[Guest]: So I was covering it with the mobile journalism kit, you know, the mojo, just the cell phone
[Guest]: and me went to Israel.
[Guest]: And everyone else was there, you know, with their big cameras and their tripods and all
[Guest]: but I had, I was really proud of the fact that we were doing it like this.
[Guest]: And kind of, you know, I stood there doing my piece to camera.
[Guest]: So first, you have to worry about the technical part of it, where, you know, frankly, I was,
[Guest]: I was so distracted about the reporting part of it that I was so worried that the mic shouldn't
[Guest]: be off, the tripod shouldn't fall apart, you know, you know, stuff like that, because you
[Guest]: worry so much about the technical part of it, because you're doing everything yourself.
[Guest]: And then I almost the ambassador almost got run over by a truck, because we were standing
[Guest]: in the middle of the road doing an interview, you know, that's I'm like, you know, I'm pulling
[Guest]: him into the frame. And then Sasne Haider was on that trip with me.
[Guest]: So she helped, you know, then, because the entire TV media went after baby Moshe who's
[Guest]: not baby anymore.
[Guest]: So you know, I need to hold the phone for me while I chased his family down and said,
[Guest]: would you would you speak to us and you know, at least she was there to help.
[Guest]: So it wasn't easy.
[Guest]: But then, on that trip, I realized we we just started doing, you know, Facebook Live also,
[Guest]: which I didn't know what the hell that was, until it happened.
[Guest]: Because now I'm going and doing these stories about the Indian community in Israel and whatever.
[Guest]: And so in addition to doing my television story, I had to first put out a web copy.
[Guest]: Now everything is on the web first.
[Guest]: And then I have to do a Facebook Live.
[Guest]: Okay, so I was like, yeh kya hai?
[Guest]: And then I had to do that also.
[Guest]: And then you have to do your television OBS also, you know, and then deal with the technology
[Guest]: and the technical issues and failures and all of that.
[Guest]: So it's not easy.
[Guest]: And that's what reporting is like on a day to day basis for a lot of young people today.
[Guest]: You know, you are doing digital, you are handling your social media accounts, a lot of them
[Guest]: are having to do YouTube stuff separately.
[Guest]: And then you have the pressures from television.
[Guest]: So and plus, you have to make sure you're actually getting your story right.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of pressure on reporters today.
[Guest]: And I have to say very honestly, Amit, it was much more fun way back then.
[Guest]: You know, I personally think so.
[Guest]: That it was much more fun when one had the time and the space to be able to think about
[Guest]: what one had to write and do.
[Guest]: I still love the rush of hard news.
[Guest]: But just sometimes it's just overwhelming.
[Guest]: And hats off to these kids, you know, who sort of manage everything so seemingly effortlessly,
[Guest]: but it really, really is not easy.
[Guest]: Because you know, even the physical demands of the job, as you know, are very real.
[Guest]: I mean, look at these reporters who've been out or reporting on the migrant crisis or
[Guest]: just the state of or of the pandemic in general.
[Guest]: And then you juggle all these things together, social media included.
[Guest]: It's not easy.
[Guest]: And you know, now, you know, when you do it, you don't just anchor a show, then you identify
[Guest]: clips to put out on social media by what will catch the audience's eye.
[Guest]: You know, what are the things that you can sort of extract and make a headline so that
[Guest]: it gets viral on Twitter becomes vital on Twitter, because now that is also important.
[Guest]: So, one good thing I'm really about NDTV in particular is that we don't do the whole hashtag
[Guest]: thing except on election day, which is elections with NDTV.
[Guest]: So there's no like, you know, hashtag like, Rahul Gandhi get a haircut, you know, something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: You know what I mean?
[Guest]: Like, you know, or what is that Times Now favorite hashtag lobby, something about the
[Guest]: lobby.
[Guest]: I don't know which lobby it is, but they have something about the lobby every day.
[Guest]: Lobby lies or lobby uses Chinese phones.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: You know, normally, when I do an episode on something, I research the subject very thoroughly.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to confess that I've watched practically no news television for the last 10 years,
[Amit Varma]: because I can't stand it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a couple of thoughts come to my mind from what you just said, the second perhaps
[Amit Varma]: leading to a question.
[Amit Varma]: One is that, you know, it seems to me that as new technology comes up, there is an element
[Amit Varma]: of faddishness that comes into reporting in the sense of these all become boxes to tick
[Amit Varma]: that Facebook Life ka box tick karo, Instagram ka box tick karo, iska box tick karo, without
[Amit Varma]: enough thought going into what is happening to the trade off, in terms of the effort that
[Amit Varma]: goes into ticking these boxes and the depth of the news.
[Amit Varma]: And the second which I'm going to turn into a question is, of course, we've all heard,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Marshall McLuhan's famous saying about the medium being the message and it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that if you know, so much of your time goes into putting stuff on Facebook Life
[Amit Varma]: and looking for clips to maybe put on Twitter or whatever all these little disparate things
[Amit Varma]: that one now has to do, doesn't that affect the depth which you can pursue a story and
[Amit Varma]: doesn't that then change the nature of the coverage in a negative way?
[Guest]: It does, to be honest, I mean, to me, like I said, I preferred the old days where you
[Guest]: could really spend time on a story and everything wasn't like some massive life and death event.
[Guest]: And you know, social media has brought with it certain pressures, but you know, you have
[Guest]: to learn to adapt.
[Guest]: That's the way life is, you know, things will evolve.
[Guest]: I don't think as some people have debated in the recent past, the television news is
[Guest]: dead.
[Guest]: It's certainly very, very problematic.
[Guest]: There are huge issues with it in India in particular right now.
[Guest]: But television viewership has exponentially shot up in the last few months.
[Guest]: So there is a huge audience for it.
[Guest]: We have to use that space responsibly.
[Guest]: And you know, we have to evolve with technology.
[Guest]: And ideally, you know, you have to have different resources for different things.
[Guest]: So we also have an NDTV, a separate social media team, etc.
[Guest]: But very often the reporters and anchors themselves have to get involved in that process.
[Guest]: And it's exhausting.
[Guest]: You know, I do think in the old days, one had more time to ponder over a headline.
[Guest]: And also, I think, at this time, you know, like, on social media every day, we all turn
[Guest]: into experts, you know, foreign affairs, today everyone is an expert on China, but yesterday
[Guest]: we were experts on depression, and what was there the day before?
[Guest]: But you know, there was something else also.
[Guest]: So anyway, everyone has an opinion on everything.
[Guest]: And you know, very often, I mean, I'll tell you simple things like a press release will
[Guest]: come, I cover, I used to cover the MEA, I have to quickly look for that, like, I don't
[Guest]: have time to like sit and read it properly, you know, it's like, quickly, quickly look
[Guest]: for the two or three important news points and just get it out on Twitter, get it out
[Guest]: on the NDTV social media handle, get it on air.
[Guest]: And you know, there's such a thing about pehle kaun karega, you know, that, to me, it stresses
[Guest]: me out a lot.
[Guest]: That's what I would say.
[Guest]: One would like to like, look at things carefully, sift through them carefully.
[Guest]: And that's just taken, for me, at least it just took a bit of the sort of fun out of
[Amit Varma]: doing this on a regular basis.
[Amit Varma]: As you're saying this, a thought that strikes me, a question that strikes me, rather, which
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, you've done a lot of, you know, as opposed to a lot of the shallow news
[Amit Varma]: coverage of the modern age, you've done a lot of deep work in the past, where you've,
[Amit Varma]: you know, done work in POK, you've done work in Tibet, like you pointed out after waiting
[Amit Varma]: a year for a visa, what is the work that you're most proud of in your career?
[Amit Varma]: And I'll make it a two part question by saying that, is there something that you're not proud
[Amit Varma]: of that you look back and said, Hey, I wish I hadn't done that?
[Guest]: That's a good question.
[Guest]: Well, I'm proud of quite a few things.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm proud of all the documentaries I've done.
[Guest]: I did quite a few, and I was really glad because NUTV gave me the space to do them, whether
[Guest]: it was the one in Tibet, or the one in Iran, I went back to, I went to cover the London
[Guest]: bombings of July 2007, as an on the spot reporting job.
[Guest]: But then I went back a month later to do a bigger in depth thing on how Muslims in Britain
[Guest]: were coping with the sort of the changes and then the way people were looking at them after
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: The POK documentary certainly was something that I was very, very proud of, also, because
[Guest]: it was a runner up at the Asian TV Awards.
[Guest]: And that was the year of the tsunami.
[Guest]: And so the tsunami one and, and this came second and I was a bit worried that they would
[Guest]: see think of it as being too political because it said Pakistan occupied Kashmir, not administered
[Guest]: Kashmir and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And but but you know, they saw merit in it.
[Guest]: And it was it was a runner up a story that is actually very boring to a lot of people.
[Guest]: But I am most proud of is my work on the India US nuclear deal, which was a story I obsessively
[Guest]: tracked from beginning to end.
[Guest]: And that's how I got interested in foreign policy.
[Guest]: And that was a very, very difficult story to do, because it's very technical.
[Guest]: It can be very, you know, technical and sort of very dense.
[Guest]: And you know, to break that down for TV viewers every single day, and to make it interesting.
[Guest]: And then it became one of the biggest political stories of our time.
[Guest]: You know, Manmohan Singh's government also nearly fell because of it.
[Guest]: It didn't, but it could have, you know, there was a confidence vote in Parliament on it.
[Guest]: So it just became like this, this amazing story to track from beginning to end.
[Guest]: Is there something I wish I shouldn't have done or that I'm not proud of?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: There's nothing I can think of offhand Amit.
[Guest]: But I'll tell you something which I've never said before.
[Guest]: Sometimes I do have doubts about whether I should have thrown Sambit Patra out of that
[Guest]: show that day.
[Amit Varma]: For those of us who don't know what you're talking about, what are you referring to?
[Guest]: There was then Oh, you don't know this?
[Amit Varma]: Are you serious?
[Amit Varma]: I don't watch much news television.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really sorry about this.
[Guest]: I think, I don't know, was it maybe three years ago or two years ago, Sambit Patra was
[Guest]: on my show and started shouting at us on air and saying that NDTV has an agenda and you
[Guest]: know, ascribing motives to us.
[Guest]: And I told him to leave.
[Guest]: I said that if I'm sorry that I will not accept this accusation.
[Guest]: And if you don't want to be on this channel, then go.
[Guest]: And you know, if you're not, if you're not going to apologize, then leave.
[Guest]: And I shot his mic down.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, it's really an infamous incident, to be honest.
[Guest]: And a lot of people were I mean, the Royals were very happy.
[Guest]: I mean, everybody was the whole organization stood by me for doing that.
[Guest]: Because every day, you know, you had BJP spokies sort of making digs at us all the time questioning
[Guest]: our sort of credibility, etc.
[Guest]: And we got raided by the CBI, I think Pranoy got raided by the CBI like two, three days
[Guest]: later, which was a coincidence, but many people sought to draw links to it.
[Guest]: But that's, you know, and then the BJP stopped coming on NDTV completely.
[Guest]: And that stands to this day, officially, they do not come on NDTV.
[Guest]: Now, at that time, until today, a lot of people, most people tell me that, you know, you did
[Guest]: the right thing, somebody has to stand up and call these guys out, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But to be honest, Amit, when I look back, sometimes I look back, and I think that maybe
[Guest]: I shouldn't have and that maybe I should have said my piece and then let it go.
[Guest]: And that it would have been more democratic of me to do it that way, rather than just
[Guest]: tell him to leave.
[Guest]: I don't know, I'm very conflicted about that.
[Guest]: But that is something I if I if I had, if I had to relive that moment, again, maybe
[Guest]: I wouldn't do it.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something for someone who feels as strongly about values and issues and indeed
[Amit Varma]: the health of our democracy as you clearly do.
[Amit Varma]: Is that sort of like, I can imagine myself losing my temper in a similar way.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember reading about the incident now that you described it.
[Amit Varma]: But is that sort of emotional control hard, for example, when you're, let's say you're
[Amit Varma]: covering Kathua, and there are people who are sort of defending the rapist, or there
[Amit Varma]: are people who are defending garlanding the lynchers, for example, both issues on which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've sort of spoken out, then at that moment does, you know, on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand, you're supposed to be this objective anchor and you're sort of you have to be calm
[Amit Varma]: and ask sharp, probing questions, but on the other hand, how can the blood not rush to
[Amit Varma]: your head?
[Amit Varma]: How do you deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: How have you faced that conflict?
[Guest]: See, in my opinion, there is absolutely no obligation to be a quote unquote objective,
[Guest]: when you're anchoring what is meant to be an opinion based show, it's fine, because
[Guest]: like newspapers have editorial pages, right?
[Guest]: So these nine o'clock bulletins can be the editorial pages of your channel, in that sense,
[Guest]: it's perfectly okay to take a position on something, I don't have a problem with that.
[Guest]: But I do have a problem with when, you know, you know, to me, there are certain things
[Guest]: which are inalienable truths, right?
[Guest]: And there are certain stories that do not have another side.
[Guest]: So for example, politicians coming out in doing rallies in defense of rape accused and
[Guest]: murder accused, like in the Katwa case, to me, that was indefensible, there was no other
[Guest]: side to the story.
[Guest]: To me, when somebody is lynched, and killed, there is no other side to the story.
[Guest]: It's wrong.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I think, yes, I mean, I think we're all human.
[Guest]: We will get emotional.
[Guest]: I think it's a question of, I think it's perfectly okay to be emotional also.
[Guest]: But you have to also know when to pull back.
[Guest]: And that's a line that only an individual can draw.
[Guest]: I have to admit that some of the stories that have disturbed me the most in the last few
[Guest]: years have been these stories, it has been depressing, actually.
[Guest]: And I've found myself often coming close to tears, when one has had to have a discussion
[Guest]: on Akhlaq or one of these horrific incidents that happened all these years, and you actually
[Guest]: have someone sitting in front of you trying to defend the garlanding of lynching accused
[Guest]: or why the tricolour was draped on the men who were accused of killing Akhlaq.
[Guest]: You know, and you just I mean, you know, a lot of people would sometimes criticize us
[Guest]: and say that, why do you call for instance, why do you call RSS spokespersons on the channel?
[Guest]: And I would say, and I still say this, that I'm sorry, but whether you like it or not,
[Guest]: they are ruling the country right now.
[Guest]: You know, they have been elected by the people.
[Guest]: And they represent what the government of India thinks at the moment.
[Guest]: So we are not legitimizing them.
[Guest]: The legitimacy has come from the last two general elections.
[Guest]: So you can't, to me, this sort of the other liberal argument, you know, that you cannot
[Guest]: listen to the other point of view at all, no matter how horrendous it is.
[Guest]: It's interesting, because, you know, that whole debate right now that happened in the
[Guest]: New York Times over that edit page by Cotton, Tom Cotton's piece here.
[Guest]: And it was interesting that there were, I think, journalists more from our era who were
[Guest]: like, well, you know, he is an elected representative.
[Guest]: We may not agree with his views, but he has a right to put them across.
[Guest]: And, you know, the Times has a right to put it in a context to say we don't agree with
[Guest]: it, etc, whatever.
[Guest]: But should it be blanked out completely?
[Guest]: You know, so I am conflicted on that question also right now.
[Guest]: But the fact is that I also feel it's important to confront people who have those views and
[Guest]: pin them down on that.
[Guest]: And sort of, shall we say, shame them for some of the kind of open bigotry and hatred
[Guest]: that they profess.
[Guest]: And I don't think there's anything wrong with that, like the hate speeches that some of
[Guest]: these guys made during the Delhi elections.
[Guest]: I had a confrontation with some of the MPs, you can't just ignore them, they're members
[Guest]: of Parliament, for God's sake.
[Guest]: It's not about giving someone a platform, but they are MPs, they've been elected, they're
[Guest]: going to stand up in Parliament and say stuff.
[Guest]: They need to be held accountable for the kind of hate speech that they're spewing.
[Guest]: And I think we need to do that.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: It is, after all, our job to afflict the comfortable sort of, you know, when you're speaking of
[Amit Varma]: politician guests on your show, a couple of thoughts come to mind.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, you know, you've been doing the show Left, Right and Centre, which is
[Amit Varma]: sort of a debate show between different points of view.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: Part one is that, given that people are inevitably going to take their party line, and even if
[Amit Varma]: they are not from a particular party, they are inevitably going to sort of take the line
[Amit Varma]: of whatever ideology or identity they've chosen for themselves, don't all these debates become
[Amit Varma]: so predictable that you broadly know in advance what everyone is going to say?
[Amit Varma]: That's part one of the question.
[Amit Varma]: And part two is that then behind the scenes, all of these people do what they do.
[Amit Varma]: I think the incentives of politics makes politicians behave in venal and reprehensible ways.
[Amit Varma]: But outside of that political framework, have you found not just politicians, but generally
[Amit Varma]: people in public life to be different from what their public personas are?
[Amit Varma]: Like, would you say that a politician you cannot agree with on issues can also turn
[Amit Varma]: out to be a nice guy and a good person, and there are these, you know, other sides to
[Guest]: them that you get to know?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, you see that all the time.
[Guest]: And yes, you're partly right about, you know, these political debates, in a sense becoming
[Guest]: very sort of predictable.
[Guest]: But I want to say something here.
[Guest]: I want to say that why is it that we in this country, which is the world's largest democracy,
[Guest]: which has this thriving political scene, why are we so averse?
[Guest]: Why is the word politicization a bad word?
[Guest]: It shouldn't be.
[Guest]: In my view, every major issue should be politicized.
[Guest]: And people as citizens, as voters should be listening to what representatives are saying
[Guest]: on those issues so that they can make up their mind on what side they are on particular issues.
[Guest]: So for instance, when people would say during the Nirbhaya gang rape time, don't politicize,
[Guest]: you know, the sexual violence against women.
[Guest]: Why not?
[Guest]: I mean, I have been saying this for the longest time that the problem is we haven't politicized
[Guest]: these issues.
[Guest]: We need to hold our publicly elected representatives accountable for the fact that women don't
[Guest]: feel safe while walking on the street or that, you know, convictions are abysmally low, etc.
[Guest]: We need to politicize these issues and I at least would want to hear what each political
[Guest]: party has to say about it.
[Guest]: So similarly, even on foreign policy and security issues, just because it's the Congress or
[Guest]: an opposition party raising it, it doesn't mean that it's wrong.
[Guest]: I think there are legitimate questions that need to be, for instance, you know, now it's
[Guest]: become sort of, again, anti-national to question anything about the armed forces or to question
[Guest]: any intelligence gaps or intelligence failures.
[Guest]: I mean, to me, it is actually patriotic to raise those questions, not just now, but I'm
[Guest]: talking about even earlier during the UPA time, that, you know, you need to ask, you
[Guest]: know, why lapses happen.
[Guest]: For instance, look at what's happening in China and Ladakh at the moment.
[Guest]: You had a clear situation where you had a section of the media that was just trying
[Guest]: to project a narrative of all is well, kuch nahi hua, it is a very small incident.
[Guest]: Look at the way it has blown up, the lack of transparency, the lack of information that's
[Guest]: coming out.
[Guest]: And I think the opposition, while standing by the country and standing by the government,
[Guest]: is well within its rights to say, boss, you know, we need answers also on why this happened
[Guest]: and how this happened.
[Guest]: And please give us those answers.
[Guest]: So I don't think that there's anything wrong with that.
[Guest]: I think it's the way that those debates are structured.
[Guest]: The problem, Amit, is that, you know, that they are, of course, completely in these shrill
[Guest]: shouting matches.
[Guest]: You can have perfectly good conversations, even debates, if you want to call them that,
[Guest]: with people from different ideologies sitting together, different political parties that
[Guest]: can be perfectly civil and yet disagree with one another, where you don't have to be screaming
[Guest]: at each other all the time, you know.
[Guest]: But much of what's happening on Indian television today is contrived.
[Guest]: It is, you call the fringe, you know, you decide that some guy in a long beard represents
[Guest]: all Muslims in India.
[Guest]: He does not.
[Guest]: Or you decide that some guy wearing a saffron robe represents all Hindus in India.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So you just, you know, kind of pit two religions against each other.
[Guest]: You start screaming in between.
[Guest]: And that's why it's been reduced to a farce.
[Guest]: And in my experience, I've given this example often, I actually found that if you do debates
[Guest]: well and you have a good conversation on important issues, it does make people sit up and think.
[Guest]: For example, when the gang rape happened in Delhi, it was the first time I saw mainstream
[Guest]: news television night after night on primetime talking about sexual violence against women.
[Guest]: And it forced the print media to make it a page one story as well.
[Guest]: And I'm not joking.
[Guest]: I think I did a primetime show on that story, like every day for the next, like, maybe two
[Guest]: months, you know, and it made a huge difference because at least people were talking about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: People were, I mean, people came out and they were agitated.
[Guest]: And that was to me that that's good that in a democracy that the people were demanding
[Guest]: accountability.
[Guest]: I mean, not in the way that it turned out, ultimately just became about a hanging and
[Guest]: not a bigger debate as it should have been about safety, about the judiciary speeding
[Guest]: up cases and convictions and all, but that apart, I'm just saying that just even having
[Guest]: that awareness to have that conversation, it became really important.
[Guest]: So I think on China, for example, it is important to hear the opposition's voice.
[Guest]: So I don't understand this thing of through doing, you know, what political parties think.
[Guest]: We elect them.
[Guest]: Let's hold them accountable.
[Guest]: Let's listen to what they have to say.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's kind of get back to social media, because for a moment there, we just discussed
[Amit Varma]: the positive side.
[Amit Varma]: And one can't really end with that because one of the, you know, the dark side of social
[Amit Varma]: media is, of course, the enormous amount of vitriol that is spread, the rumors that is
[Amit Varma]: spread, the abuse that, you know, people are constantly confronted with, and all of it,
[Amit Varma]: especially harder for a woman.
[Amit Varma]: So now you are on the one hand, you're looking at social media closely for tips and new angles
[Amit Varma]: like this hospital has run out of bed, or there are interesting points of view, which
[Amit Varma]: you can take into account.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, there is also so much ugliness, and it cannot but help affect you
[Amit Varma]: when this happens.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the journalist Kanika Kohli had a thread I found quite moving on Twitter recently
[Amit Varma]: about how she was personally so affected when the IT troll farms came after her that she,
[Amit Varma]: you know, almost had an anxiety attack and had to kind of go to the loo very moving thread.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and all prominent women kind of go through that.
[Guest]: How did you deal with that?
[Guest]: It's not nice, Amit.
[Guest]: It's not nice at all.
[Guest]: And I mean, I really feel for Kanika because I understand how she would have felt it's,
[Guest]: you know, the thing is that on social media on Twitter in particular, I don't know, I
[Guest]: mean, it's sort of a free for all against women, they'll say that we respect women,
[Guest]: and then you know, they'll, they'll, they'll abuse you in the next sentence.
[Guest]: And they somehow think that talking about a woman's personal life, or, you know, her
[Guest]: sex life or something is, is somehow demeaning.
[Guest]: I mean, it is it is extremely difficult as a woman to be on social media.
[Guest]: I would agree with that.
[Guest]: It's toxic.
[Guest]: And frankly, I would not even be on Twitter, if it wasn't for the fact that people would,
[Guest]: you know, sort of creating these fake accounts in my name, and tweeting, and then people
[Guest]: would message me on every day and say, Oh, have you said this on Twitter?
[Guest]: And I would say, No, that's not me.
[Guest]: So finally, I had, how many accounts can I complain against, right, Twitter would keep
[Guest]: taking them down, but I can't, like, you know, do it every week.
[Guest]: So I decided I had to come on at least have a verified account so that whatever is going
[Guest]: out there is going out there in my name, and that so those those fake accounts actually
[Guest]: stopped after that.
[Guest]: But otherwise, I honestly don't find it fulfilling at all it is it is extremely, extremely toxic,
[Guest]: particularly so for women.
[Guest]: And I understand where Karnika comes from, in that because everyone deals with these
[Guest]: issues differently.
[Guest]: I've developed a much thicker skin now than I had maybe like, say, five or six years ago,
[Guest]: when it really would affect me now it doesn't in that way.
[Guest]: But everyone has different ways to deal with things.
[Guest]: Not everyone will react the same way.
[Guest]: And that's why it's it's not a safe space for women.
[Amit Varma]: That's for sure.
[Amit Varma]: And do you have a hack to deal with it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did you ignore notifications or you know, do you just mute everyone who abuses
[Guest]: you once so over time you see less of it?
[Guest]: I used to mute I was very polite, but then a friend of mine, why are you polite and he's
[Guest]: on Twitter as well.
[Guest]: And he's like, I just I just block abusers.
[Guest]: So anyone who abuses I block, and I block out misogynists, you know, and those that
[Guest]: just are annoying because you can be annoyed.
[Guest]: I mute them.
[Guest]: And I'm sorry, that's there's no free speech argument here.
[Guest]: You're free to speak now.
[Guest]: You go and speak and abuse and do whatever you want on your timeline.
[Guest]: I have I also have the right to not have to listen to your crap.
[Amit Varma]: So I block you.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: No one's entitled to our attention.
[Amit Varma]: And the other sort of aspect of social media is that what social media does is that it
[Amit Varma]: polarizes the discourse in very drastic ways in the sense that the discourse becomes very
[Amit Varma]: tribal, we form our own echo chambers, and then we need to, you know, keep posturing
[Amit Varma]: to raise our status within our own echo chamber, which can often mean sort of abusing the other
[Amit Varma]: side or whatever, and it gets more and more polarized.
[Amit Varma]: And what this means for liberals often is that you have all these online purity tests,
[Amit Varma]: where you will have people who are, you know, perfectly good liberals in every way, getting
[Amit Varma]: attacked by other liberals for not being liberal enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I have seen this happen to you as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, like even in the Tom Cotton case, that's basically what it is David Bennett, opinion
[Amit Varma]: editor who was made to resign is, you know, an impeccable liberal in every way who was
[Amit Varma]: just following this basic journalistic convention of giving the other side a chance to say their
[Amit Varma]: piece so that readers can judge for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you feel about these sort of online purity tests and these mobs that descend upon
[Guest]: you if you deviate from the party line?
[Guest]: Well, see, that's the thing, right, that I'm glad that I don't fit into a particular box.
[Guest]: I am neither black nor white.
[Guest]: And like most people, I'm somewhere in between, you know, and that's perfectly okay with me.
[Guest]: I mean, I have a certain view, for example, on the way India and Delhi handles the situation
[Guest]: within Kashmir.
[Guest]: But I have a very different view on the way on Pakistan's role in Kashmir.
[Guest]: So I can be both.
[Guest]: And I'm not going to apologize for that, you know.
[Guest]: So in any case, the conservative right wing thinks I'm too liberal and I'm not the conservative
[Guest]: right wing at all.
[Guest]: But I just find that the so-called liberals are actually often, Amit, the most illiberal
[Guest]: people you can come across in the way that they go after people for having a different
[Guest]: point of view.
[Guest]: And I expect it of the extreme right wing because I ain't no friend of theirs and they
[Guest]: ain't no friends of mine, let's face it.
[Guest]: We are completely ideologically at odds, right?
[Guest]: That even, I mean, among liberals, why can't someone have a nuanced point of view on something?
[Guest]: You can, right?
[Guest]: And there's nothing wrong with that.
[Guest]: And therefore, that's why we get stuck in echo chambers.
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, to me, that explains why Donald Trump might get elected president again
[Guest]: and why he got elected the first time.
[Guest]: Because in America also, you had these echo chambers where, you know, people were just
[Guest]: not willing to listen to what was actually happening on the ground.
[Guest]: And incidentally, Shekhar Gupta shared a very good piece.
[Guest]: I don't remember who wrote it on this whole thing about what's happening in American newsrooms.
[Guest]: And it had the sort of the New York Times resignation as an example of it, about just
[Guest]: how illiberal liberals have become.
[Guest]: So you know, frankly, I now just wear it as a badge of honor.
[Guest]: I am who I am.
[Guest]: I am an individual.
[Guest]: I am entitled to my opinions.
[Guest]: If I'm not liberal enough for you, screw you, doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it also strikes me that, you know, the thing about the extreme right is they
[Amit Varma]: wear their bigotry on their sleeve, but the extreme left can dress it up in sanctimony,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, irritates me a little bit more sometimes.
[Guest]: I agree with you.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, as someone who's covered the conflict in J&K has, you know, seen personally
[Guest]: what it has, what Pakistan sponsored terrorism has done in the Kashmir Valley.
[Guest]: I have no qualms in calling out Pakistan's role in sponsoring terrorism and kind of bloodshed
[Guest]: it has unleashed in our country.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I am critical of the way the government has handled things in Kashmir
[Guest]: with an iron fist, particularly after the 5th of August last year.
[Guest]: You have detained people.
[Guest]: You've detained people for months on end.
[Guest]: A former chief minister is still under detention.
[Guest]: Is this a democracy?
[Guest]: This is the world's largest, longest internet blackout.
[Guest]: You still don't have 4G internet up.
[Guest]: And what, the same rules of law do not apply to the people of Kashmir, are Kashmiris not
[Guest]: our people?
[Guest]: Are they not Indians?
[Guest]: So I, you know, you can be both, you know, you can be both.
[Guest]: That's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: So I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, like this liberal thing of, you know, then they're like, oh, I mean, you know, oh,
[Guest]: she's talking about Pakistan this way because, you know, she must be feeling the pressure
[Guest]: to say that.
[Guest]: No, that's always been my point of view.
[Guest]: My documentary from POK, which got that award did because, you know, it took that line that
[Guest]: it did.
[Guest]: And yet I'm somebody who is for dialogue between India and Pakistan because I don't think war
[Guest]: is a solution.
[Guest]: So I can be that also, no?
[Guest]: I'm just saying that people are not black and white, views are not black and white.
[Guest]: And that's the problem on social media and even on television, frankly.
[Guest]: The moment you put people in a debate as foreign against, it becomes really banal and you oversimplify
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the ways I found of judging tribal thinking is that if you are against Modi,
[Amit Varma]: can you say even one good thing about him?
[Amit Varma]: Or if you're for him, can you say even one bad thing about him?
[Amit Varma]: And the answer is often no.
[Amit Varma]: And then you know that in that case, that's just tribal thinking, because everyone contains
[Amit Varma]: multitudes and even the person you're against has done some good things.
[Amit Varma]: And even the person you're for has flaws that you should be awake to.
[Amit Varma]: You know, my next question is sort of it kind of strikes me and I'm again sort of thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud here that when I look back in the last 25 years or so, the one profession where I
[Amit Varma]: can see that women have visibly excelled and, you know, made an impression and become incredible
[Amit Varma]: role models is in TV journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm, of course, thinking of people like, you know, you and Barkha, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: some of our finest TV journalists are women, that's indisputable.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, like, does it sort of irritate you when you're covered, not just
[Amit Varma]: as a great TV journalist, but as a TV journalist as a woman, for example, I was searching online
[Amit Varma]: for articles in a few interviews of you and I came across this piece which was headlined,
[Amit Varma]: no skirting of issues, which within the piece headlines like, you know, quote, the importance
[Amit Varma]: of dressing cannot be dismissed, stop quote, and then quote, again, planning her outfit
[Amit Varma]: on a daily basis is one of the first things she probably does in the day.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even remember what it is.
[Amit Varma]: This came in Verve, you know, so I don't know what the journalists must have asked to get
[Amit Varma]: you to talk about your daily outfit planning.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you correctly put her in a place by saying that when I wake up, I'm thinking
[Amit Varma]: of stories and I just pick up the first clothes that come to mind.
[Guest]: So I think I remember this now I think she's quite gutted because I actually honestly don't
[Guest]: remember the last time I thought about what to wear.
[Guest]: But yeah, that's, that's a funny thing that you reminded me about.
[Guest]: Yeah, God.
[Amit Varma]: And does it become irritating when you know, people will try to put you into a box and
[Amit Varma]: think of you as a woman journalist or a Kashmiri Pandit journalist and just look at you in
[Amit Varma]: that box?
[Amit Varma]: Does that can which you wouldn't do yourself as a journalist?
[Guest]: I don't like the woman box, to be honest, because it's true.
[Guest]: I mean, the fact is that for women, things are are generally much tougher in any profession.
[Guest]: And you know, I think it's great when women sort of become role models for other young
[Guest]: women and their peers, and you know, are able to break certain glass ceilings.
[Guest]: And I think that's what's great about NDTV in particular, because I was telling someone
[Guest]: yesterday who was talking to me about, you know, my journey as a woman journalist.
[Guest]: And she was like, I'm sure you faced biases.
[Guest]: And I said, actually, I haven't, I mean, because I've lived in this bubble in NDTV, where most
[Guest]: of our editors have been women, our primetime anchors have been women, gender was never
[Guest]: a factor when an assignment was given to you, whether it was an earthquake or a riot somewhere.
[Guest]: Of course, you took care of basic safety, but you know, gender wasn't a factor.
[Guest]: So apart from, you know, some sort of leery remarks by some people here and there, when
[Guest]: one step outside that, I'm glad that I was, you know, in this environment where it was
[Guest]: really different.
[Guest]: But so I don't mind the woman part of it, you know, I, I'm okay with that.
[Guest]: And to be honest, no, I mean, no, no one's asked me since that interview about what lipstick
[Guest]: shade is my favorite or something.
[Guest]: And there's nothing wrong with that.
[Guest]: By the way, I really like lipstick.
[Guest]: And that's still, you know, I mean, that's who I am.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Just just keep that in mind.
[Guest]: I love I love lipstick.
[Amit Varma]: I love kajal, at which point I have to ask you, what is your favorite shade?
[Guest]: There's always timeless red Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, okay.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we have 10 minutes to go before you have to head out.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not going to ask you about a subject which you know, we could discuss in a full
[Amit Varma]: episode, which is of course, Kashmir, which you know, you've seen up close as a journalist,
[Amit Varma]: you have that personal element with it, I don't think we can do it justice in the few
[Amit Varma]: minutes that we have left.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll sort of ask my standard question with which I end a lot of my episodes where I ask
[Amit Varma]: guests on the subject of their choice, what gives you hope and what gives you despair.
[Amit Varma]: So looking at the Indian media, where we are today, where you know, on the on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you have this polarization and this race to the bottom in TV news.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you also have the growth of technology and you know, the unknown unknowns
[Amit Varma]: which might change everything for the better.
[Amit Varma]: Looking say 10 years into the future, what gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest]: I want to first say that I don't think that the race to the bottom is just on television.
[Guest]: And I want to say very clearly that I think it's in the media as a whole, including the
[Guest]: print media.
[Guest]: Because when you look at the reporting that is done, I know that a lot of it, even in
[Guest]: our newspapers is just government spin.
[Guest]: It has become dependent on government handouts and press releases.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: And I think all of us in the media need to reflect on this.
[Guest]: If certain sources, quote unquote, are telling you that X number of Chinese soldiers have
[Guest]: been killed, you know, in this battle that happened the other day, why aren't they seeing
[Guest]: it on record?
[Guest]: You know, this happened during Balakot as well, where suddenly sources started appearing.
[Guest]: And I knew who the source initially was, which is why people went with it.
[Guest]: But to me, it's deeply problematic when the media is putting out unverified stuff and
[Guest]: not demanding that the government go on record with certain things.
[Guest]: So it has become, unfortunately, even in the print media, a lot of it is spin and press
[Guest]: release journalism.
[Guest]: I'm tired of reading pieces about why X politician is sleeping only four hours a day.
[Guest]: I'm tired of reading op-eds, by the way, also by ministers and, you know, only opposition
[Guest]: leaders and, you know, with no nuance at all.
[Guest]: So, you know, print, I think, has also gone down that road to the bottom.
[Guest]: What gives me hope is those that do stand out, despite the pressures that are there,
[Guest]: which is, as you mentioned, there are some web portals that are doing a great job of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I think there are still a couple of newspapers that are doing a good job, like the Indian
[Guest]: Express and The Hindu with their flaws, NDTV.
[Guest]: I'm not saying we're not, and NDTV is not flawed, there are flaws with us also, but,
[Guest]: you know, we're all holding our heads above the water and doing the best that we can.
[Guest]: And, you know, the rest of them, frankly, they don't inspire much hope.
[Guest]: But I do get hope from the rest of from the examples that stand out.
[Guest]: I mean, that the fact that there are people who are willing to push back, that gives me
[Guest]: a lot of hope.
[Guest]: And in any case, I don't like to despair.
[Guest]: So I think I'd rather be hopeful.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show, Nidhi.
[Amit Varma]: I hope you have a good time at Harvard.
[Amit Varma]: And if you can, please put your course out as a MOOC so other people like me can also
[Amit Varma]: sort of take it and learn from a distance.
[Amit Varma]: But in any case, all the best.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm very sure that we haven't heard the last of you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest]: No, I don't know how to keep quiet.
[Guest]: So I think I'll be around.
[Guest]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: It was nice talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Ditto.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Nidhi on Twitter at Nidhi.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-P-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And in case you haven't yet signed up for this exciting course I am teaching called
[Amit Varma]: TikTok and Indian Society.
[Amit Varma]: Well, it begins on Wednesday, June 24.
[Amit Varma]: So hop on over to seen unseen.in slash TikTok to check it out.
[Amit Varma]: Also do check out my new weekly economics podcast co-hosted by Vivek Kaul called Econ
[Amit Varma]: Central.
[Amit Varma]: You'll find it at econcentral.in or in your podcast player of choice.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen at seen unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.